docs(uploads): Add upload docs (#11398)
redwoodjs/redwood: docs/docs/uploads.md

</details>

What this configures is:

**A) CRUD operations**
No need to do anything here, but you have to use processors to supply Prisma with data in the correct format.

What this will ensure is:
- when the record is deleted, the associated upload is removed from storage
- when a record is updated, the associated upload file is also replaced

...and negative cases such as:
- processed uploads are removed if creation fails
- processed uploads are removed if update fails (while keeping the original)

**B) Result extensions**

```ts title="api/src/services/profiles/profiles.ts"
export const profile: QueryResolvers['profile'] = async ({ id }) => {
  // 👇 await the result from your prisma query
  const profile = await db.profile.findUnique({
    where: { id },
  })

  // Convert the avatar field (which is a path) to data uri string
  // Note that you still need to add a api endpoint to handle these signed urls
  return profile?.withDataUri()
}
```

:::tip
It's important to note limitations around what Prisma extensions can do:

a) The CRUD operations will not run on nested read and write operations <br/>
b) Result extensions are not available on relations

:::

## Upload processors

> You'll also need a way to convert the incoming `File` to a path on disk. In your services, you can use the preconfigured "processors" to convert Files to strings for Prisma to save into the database. The processors, and storage adapters configured in `api/src/lib/uploads` determine where the file is saved.

Author: Reforded it now, think it might be a tiny bit clearer!

In essence, these utility functions expect to take an object very similar to the Prisma data argument (the data you're passing to your `create`, `update`), but with File objects at fields `avatar`, and `signedDocument` instead of strings. 

If your `File` is in a different key (or a key did you did not configure in the upload config), it will be ignored and left as is.
:::

### Processing File lists

If you would like to upload FileLists (or an arrays of Files), use this special processor to save your Files to path strings. This is necessary because String arrays aren't supported on databases - you probably want to save them to a different table, or specific fields.

Let's say you define in your SDL, a way to send an Array of files.

```graphql
input UpdateAlbumInput {
  name: String
  photos: [File]
}
```

You can use the file list processor like this:

```ts title="api/src/services/albums.ts"
export const updateAlbum = async ({
  id,
  input,
}) => {

  // notice we're passing in the file list, and not the input!
  // highlight-next-line
  const processedInput = await uploadProcessors.processFileList(input.photos)

>   /* Returns an array like this:
>   [
>   '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg',
>   '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg',
>   ]
>   */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Returns an array like this:
  // [
  //   '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg',
  //   '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg',
  // ]
```

>   const mappedPhotos = processedInput.map((path) => ({ path }))

Reviewer: I like how you included an example of what `processedInput` could look like, so I continued that pattern here

```suggestion
  const mappedPhotos = processedInput.map((path) => ({ path }))
  // Will make `mappedPhotos` be an array of objects like this:
  // [
  //   { path: '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg' },
  //   { path: '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg' },
  // ]
```

That's because when you send a [File](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/File) - the Redwood Apollo client will switch the request to a multipart form request, using [GraphQL Multipart Request Spec](https://github.com/jaydenseric/graphql-multipart-request-spec). This is the case whether you send a `File`, `FileList` or `Blob` (which is a less specialised File).

On the backend, GraphQL Yoga is pre-configured to handle multipart form requests, _as long as_ you specify the `File` scalar in your SDL.

</details>

## Storage

### Prisma schema configuration

Great now you can receive Files from GraphQL - but how do you go about saving them, and tracking them in your database?

In your Prisma schema, the `avatar` field should be defined as a string:

```prisma title="api/db/schema.prisma"
model Profile {
  id: Int
  // ... other fields
  // highlight-next-line
  avatar String?
}
```

This is because Prisma doesn't have a native File type. Instead, we store the file path or URL as a string in the database. The actual file processing and storage will be handled in your service layer, and pass the path to Prisma to save.

### Setting up Storage savers and Prisma extension

> To make it easier (and more consistent) dealing with file uploads, Redwood gives you a standardized way of saving your uploads (i.e. write to storage) and a prisma extension that will handle deletion and updates automatically for you. The rest of the doc assumes you are running a "Serverful" configuration for your deployments, as it involves the file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make it easier (and more consistent) dealing with file uploads, Redwood gives you a standardized way of saving your uploads (i.e. write to storage) and a Prisma extension that will handle deletion and updates automatically for you. The rest of the doc assumes you are running a "Serverful" configuration for your deployments, as it involves the file system.
```

  baseDir: './uploads',
})

// ⭐ (3) Optional
export const urlSigner = new UrlSigner({
  secret: process.env.UPLOADS_SECRET,
  endpoint: '/signedUrl',
})

// ⭐ (4)
const { saveFiles, storagePrismaExtension } = setupStorage({
  uploadsConfig,
  storageAdapter: fsStorage,
  urlSigner,
})

export { saveFiles, storagePrismaExtension }
```

Let's break down the key components of this configuration:

**1. Upload Configuration**
This is where you configure the fields that will receive uploads. In our case, it's the profile.avatar field.

The shape of `UploadsConfig` looks like this:

```
[prismaModel] : {
   fields: ['modelField1']
 }
```

**2. Storage Adapter**
We create a storage adapter, in this case `FileSystemStorage` - that will save your uploads to the `./uploads` folder.

This just sets the base path, and the actual filenames and folders are determined by processors, but can be overridden!

**3. Url Signer instance**
This is an optional class that will help you generate signed urls for your files, so you can limit access to these files.

**4. Grab your utilities**
Get your utilities, and export them from this file to be used elsewhere.

> - `saveFiles` - object containing functions to save File objects to storage, and return a path.

Reviewer: Love how you updated the wording here! <3

```

We'll be using these in services.

- `prismaExtension` - The prisma client extension we'll use in `api/src/lib/db.ts` to automatically handle updates, deletion of uploaded files (including when the prisma operation fails). It also configures [Result extensions](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-client/client-extensions/result), to give you utilities like `profile.withSignedUrl()`.

### Attaching the Prisma extension

Now we need to extend our db client in `api/src/lib/db.ts` to use the configured prisma client.

```ts title="api/src/lib/db.ts"
import { PrismaClient } from '@prisma/client'

import { emitLogLevels, handlePrismaLogging } from '@redwoodjs/api/logger'

import { logger } from './logger'
// highlight-next-line
import { storagePrismaExtension } from './uploads'

// 👇 Notice here we create prisma client, and don't export it yet
export const prismaClient = new PrismaClient({
  log: emitLogLevels(['info', 'warn', 'error']),
})

handlePrismaLogging({
  db: prismaClient,
  logger,
  logLevels: ['info', 'warn', 'error'],
})

// 👇 Export db after adding uploads extension
// highlight-next-line
export const db = prismaClient.$extends(storagePrismaExtension)
```

> The `$extends` method is used to extend the functionality of your Prisma client by adding -[Query extensions](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-client/client-extensions/query): which will intercept your `create`, `update`, `delete` operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `$extends` method is used to extend the functionality of your Prisma client by adding: 

-[Query extensions](https://www.prisma.io/docs/orm/prisma-client/client-extensions/query): which will intercept your `create`, `update`, `delete` operations
```

```ts
const filesViaRelation = await db.folder
  .findUnique({ where: { id: root?.id } })
  .files()

const filesWhereQuery = await db.file.findMany({
  where: {
    folderId: root?.id,
  },
})

// 🛑 Will not work, because files accessed via relation
// highlight-next-line
return filesViaRelation.map((file) => file.withSignedUrl())

// ✅ OK, because direct lookup
// highlight-next-line
return filesWhereQuery.map((file) => file.withSignedUrl())
```

:::

## Upload savers

You'll also need a way to actually save the incoming `File` object to a file persisted on storage. In your services, you can use the pre-configured "savers" to convert Files to strings for Prisma to save into the database. The savers, and storage adapters configured in `api/src/lib/uploads` determine where the file is saved.

```ts title="api/src/services/profiles/profiles.ts"
// highlight-next-line
import { saveFiles } from 'src/lib/uploads'

export const updateProfile: MutationResolvers['updateProfile'] = async ({
  id,
  input,
}) => {
  // highlight-next-line
  const processedInput = await saveFiles.forProfile(input)

  // input.avatar (File) becomes a string 👇

>   // The configuration on where it was saved is passed when we setup uploads in src/lib/uploads.ts

Reviewer: I had to do a double-take on this sentence. There's nothing wrong with it, so feel free to keep it as-is, but here's a suggestion that I personally think makes it easier to read:

```suggestion
  // Configuration in src/lib/uploads.ts determine where the upload is saved
```

Or maybe

```suggestion
  // Settings in src/lib/uploads.ts configures where the upload is saved
```

If your `File` is in a different key (or a key did you did not configure in the upload config), it will be ignored and left as-is.
:::

### Processing File lists

If you would like to upload FileLists (or an arrays of Files), use this special utility to save your Files to storage. This is necessary because String arrays aren't supported on databases - you probably want to save them to a different table, or specific fields.

Let's say you define in your SDL, a way to send an Array of files.

```graphql
input UpdateAlbumInput {
  name: String
  photos: [File]
}
```

You can use the file list processor like this:

```ts title="api/src/services/albums.ts"
export const updateAlbum = async ({
  id,
  input,
}) => {

  // notice we're passing in the file list, and not the input!
  // highlight-next-line
  const processedInput = await saveFiles.inList(input.photos)
  /* Returns an array like this:
  [
    '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg',
    '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg',
  ]
  */

  const mappedPhotos = processedInput.map((path) => ({ path }))

>   /* Will make `mappedPhotos` be an array of objects like this:
>    [
>     { path: '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg' },
>     { path: '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg' },
>    ]
>    */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /* Will make `mappedPhotos` be an array of objects like this:
  [
    { path: '/baseStoragePath/AG1258019MAFGK.jpg' },
    { path: '/baseStoragePath/BG1059149NAKKE.jpg' },
  ]
  */
```
